# AMT: Data-Efficient Adaptive Multi-Sample Testing for Binomial Data

This repository contains all code required to reproduce the experiments of the paper "AMT: Data-Efficient Adaptive Multi-Sample Testing for Binomial Data".

For dependency and python version management, we use pyenv and poetry, to facilitate the code setup. 
In the following we describe the installation of these tools and the code, we will then describe how to reproduce the experiments.

## Installation:

install pyenv dependencies:

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y make build-essential libssl-dev zlib1g-dev libbz2-dev \
libreadline-dev libsqlite3-dev wget curl llvm libncurses5-dev libncursesw5-dev \
xz-utils tk-dev libffi-dev liblzma-dev python-openssl git
```

install pyenv:

```bash
curl -L https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv-installer/raw/master/bin/pyenv-installer | bash
```

add it to bash, by adding the following to the bottom of the file  `~/.bashrc`:

```bash
export PATH="/home/user/.pyenv/bin:$PATH"
eval "$(pyenv init -)"
eval "$(pyenv virtualenv-init -)"
```

install python version:

```bash
pyenv install 3.13
```

install poetry:

```bash
curl -sSL https://install.python-poetry.org | python3 -
```

add it to bash, by adding the following to the bottom of the file  `~/.bashrc`:

```bash
export PATH="/home/i40/boehnkeb/.local/bin:$PATH"
```

set poetry to use pyenv:

```bash
poetry config virtualenvs.prefer-active-python true
```

And make sure venv are created inside a project:

```bash
poetry config virtualenvs.in-project true
```

install project dependencies (execute inside the project folder):

```bash
poetry install
```

wait for all dependencies to install.
You are now ready to run the experiments.

## Running Experiments:
The project is structured into two parts, a python package containing the actual AMT implementation together with a lightweight experiment framework in the "amt" folder, and a collection of utility scripts, which enable execution and plotting of the experiments.
Here, all scripts for running the experiments start with `run_`, while all scripts for plotting start with `plot_`.
To run the experiments one only needs to run the utility scripts in the following manner:

1. Run `run_selection.py` to perform the coin selection with all the available sampling strategies under all experiment configurations.
The result will be one file per experiment configuration containing the contingency tables.
Alternatively, run `run_selection_real.py` to evaluate on data with characteristics taken from real world data.
To run only a subset of experiments, feel free to change the used experiment configuration (see section 'Configuring Custom Experiments').

2. Run `run_stat.py` to calculate the classical test statistics using the data from the contingency tables.
The result will be one file per test statistic and experiment configuration containing the test statistics.

3. Run `run_multitest.py` to compute the single coin subtests based on our new test statistic.
The result will be one file per experiment configuration containing all the N subtest results.

4. Run `run_permutation_test.py` to calculate the permutation tests based on the classical test statistics.
Requires the files generated by `run_stat.py`.
The result will be one file per test and experiment configuration containing the test results.

5. Run `run_multitest_to_test.py` to calculate the omnibus test based on the single coin subtests.
Requires the files generated by `run_multitest.py`.
The result will be one file per experiment configuration containing the test results - with the same format as created by `run_permutation_test.py`.

Now you have reproduced the experiments for $\delta p=0.05$.
To reproduce the experiments for $\delta p=0.10$ or $\delta p=0.15$ or to perform any custom experiment you can easily do so by changing the `Config` object in the run file (or when performing multiple different experiments create multiple such `Config` objects in a for-loop as done in the utility scripts):

### Configuring Custom Experiments
All the experiments can be easily set up using appropriate `Config` objects.
Such an object has the following parameters:

```python
n:int # The number of coins
m:int # The number of plated coins m<n
```

```python
sample_size:int = 2000 # The iteration limit
```
It is a proxy for the total number of trials / combined sample size.

```python
initial_size:int = 10 # The initial sample size initial_size < sample_size
reps:int = 10000 # The number of test repetitions
common_p:float # The success probability of all non plated coins
p_diff:float = 0.05 # The difference in p for plated coins, i.e., the $\delta p$
```

```python
selection_mode:str # The coin selection mode (sampling strategy)
```
Possible values are:

"adapt", "rand", "equal", "cons", "opt", "adapt.slow", "adapt.cons", "beta", "ts", "ts.5", "beta.rand", "beta.null", "beta.inf", "beta.inf2", "beta.med", "means", "mean.slow"

"beta.med" is our beta selection from the paper.

```python
test_mode:str # The used test statistic
```
Possible values for statistics are:

"chi2", "beta", "beta.sum", "count", "kw", "mean"

"beta" is our Beta statistic from the paper.

And our Beta-Binomial statistic:

"betabinom.crit", "betabinom.pval", "betabinom.pmf", "betabinom.comb"

Where "betabinom.crit", "betabinom.pmf" are exact methods but vectorized calculation is performed repetition or iteration wise using the ppf or the pmf (which can have computational benefits).

"betabinom.pval" a approximate calculation using the cdf (which has a bias for small sample sizes due to the discrete nature of the Binomial distribution).

"betabinom.comb" a combination of the exact pmf method and the approximate cdf method which switches to the approximate method at sample size of 500 (big enough to neglect the approximation error).

```python
coin_weights:str = "posdif" # The method to calculate the individual coin weights given `n`, `m`, `common_p`, and `p_diff`.
```
Only "posdif" is implemented, which adds `p_diff` to the `m` plated coins.

```python
significance:tuple = (0.05,0.025,0.01) # The significance levels for which the test should be performed
dataset:str # The name of a real-live data set if one should be used instead of synthetic data
```

## Plotting and Visualizing Experiment Results:

The script `table_results.py` creates the result overview table from the paper, all the other `plot_` scripts plot the figures for the specified `Config` objects.